+++
title = "Whosoever will lose his life"
date = "2017-01-22"
+++
*Based on a talk given in a YSA sacrament meeting*

What can I tell you about service that you haven't already heard?
That's the question I've tried to answer as I've studied for this
talk. I've identified at least two different angles we can view
service from. The first is what I call "along the way" service.

I believe we all have opportunities to do good for others every day.
These opportunities are often small things, and it can be easy to miss
them if we aren't looking. But when we think of service, these
opportunities are what often come to mind.

I can think of several times when I have received service along the
way from others. One of the times in my life when I felt the most love
from another person happened while I was a missionary in Singapore. We
had church from 1:00 to 4:00, and we often didn't get around to having
lunch before hand. It was probably because we were just disorganized,
but instead I'll use the excuse that we probably missed lunch because
we were just working so hard all the time. In either case, we would
suffer until the end of church at which point we could go home and eat
an early dinner.

On one particular Sunday, one of the members approached us after
sacrament meeting. She had made sandwiches for all the missionaries.
That was pretty substantial too, because at the time there were seven
missionaries in that ward. I was astounded by that sandwich. I don't
think she knew we skipped lunch, but obviously the Spirit knew. It's
hard to describe how grateful I was to that sister for that sandwich.
After Sunday school and into the beginning of Elder's quorum, I tried
to unwrap and eat it without making too much noise. It was a great
sandwich&mdash;it even had lettuce and tomatoes and stuff like that.

There have been many other times when people have served me. One
companion I had made smoothies for the two of us every morning. Last
semester, I had a roommate named Kaycen who often cooked for us and
other people like his home teachees. I was exceedingly astonished
because he had the ability to make a whole pan of cinnamon rolls and
give them all away without leaving a single one for himself. I asked
him how he could do something like that. He said that seeing the
happiness in other people when he gave them the food made it worth it
to him. I thought that was profound.

By the way, I do realize that all my examples involve food, and no, I
don't know why. I've heard about these five love language things. I
don't remember what they are, but food must be one of them, and maybe
my love language is just food. Or perhaps more plausibly, good food is
a need that I often neglect myself. Before my mission, I sort of lived
on cereal and toast because I was too lazy to prepare real food for
myself. The need to eat was always pitted against my dislike of
preparing food, so I would just not eat. Eventually the need to eat
would increase enough that I would finally give in and find whatever
was quickest to make. Hence, toast and cereal. In the MTC, I gained 15
pounds just because I started to eat regular meals again.

So now that you understand that about me, you can see why I really
appreciate other people making good food for me. It fulfills a need
that is often neglected. When your charitable actions meet the needs
of those whom you serve, that is when you will have the greatest
impact.

Jesus, of course, offers the perfect example of this service. He "went
about doing good." But although his life was filled with various acts
of service, there was one primary act that He came to earth to
accomplish: the Atonement. This was the supreme act of service that
only He could do. All the other good He did was an appendage to that
great act.

Like Christ, our lives can and should be filled with everyday acts of
kindness. But I believe there can be more to it then that. I believe
that each of us has an important mission to fulfill in this life. If
we focus on that mission, it will become more clear how our entire
lives can be dedicated to others.

I recently finished reading a book called "The Wise Men: Six Friends
and the World They Made." It's about six people who were responsible
for much of America's foreign policy after WWII and beyond. I had
never heard their names before reading the book, but after I finished,
I felt touched by the lives they had led. To me, this was not a book
about 20th century American foreign policy. It was a book about
individuals who had worn out their lives in service to their fellow
citizens. They certainly had character flaws, but together they
accomplished things that no one else would have.

Another book I highly recommend is "Mormon Scientist," the biography
of Henry J. Eyring, father of Henry B. Eyring. He found something that
he loved&mdash;science&mdash;and he dedicated his life to it. Although I've
forgotten many of the details in that book, I haven't forgotten the
impressions that were made on my mind by this man's example. He was so
dedicated to his profession, but it was all rooted in a deep concern
for those around him. There were people who had only met him for a few
minutes, but the love they could feel emanating from him in that short
amount of time had a profound impact on their lives. He also was a
staunch advocate of the compatibility between science and religion.
His ideas on this subject are a great service to many, including
myself. Few other people have the ability to render that kind of
service.

I love reading books like this because they give me so much
inspiration to do similar things with my own life. It's easy to get
caught up in the daily grind, focusing on the next assignment that's
due. But these books make me excited, which by the way, is something
that doesn't happen very often. They make me think that I really could
change the world, too.

That being said, we don't have to accomplish great things in the eyes
of the world for our lives to be successful. As a matter of
coincidence, the things I want to do with my life do have the side
effect of making me rich, famous and powerful, but that's not the
point. All those things are only appendages to the greater goal I have
of an eternal marriage and raising my future children in
righteousness. (Speaking of which, I am single. Just throwing that out
there).

You may have heard the idea that this period of our lives is a
"selfish" time. A lot of our time is spent focused on ourselves as we
pursue our education and careers. Maybe that idea is prevalent because
we don't have our own families yet. In any case, I do agree that we
should seek to fill our lives with acts of along-the-way service, but
I don't think the purpose of that is to counterbalance all the time we
"selfishly" spend doing homework. Instead, I think we should frame our
lives in terms of service to others. We can make the end goal of all
our current labor to bless the lives of other people, especially our
future families. If that becomes the main focus of daily labors, it
will also become easier to see the chances we have to lift others
along the way.

I think President Monson is a great example of this kind of life. He's
been in full-time service for the church for eons, but we also hear of
how he takes the long way home, ministering to the one as he goes.
This kind of lifestyle demonstrates what service is all about.
Sometimes when I think of service, the first thing that comes to my
mind is service projects. And then I think about standing around not
knowing what to do because there are 50 people and it's really hard to
organize 50 people. But service can be so much more than that. A
description of service that I like is "love in action." That sheds
light on just how important service really is. Service is the method
by which we exercise charity.

> For whosoever will save his life shall lose it; and whosoever will
> lose his life for my sake shall find it. For what is a man profited,
> if he shall gain the whole world, and lose his own soul?" (Matthew
> 16:25-26).

Choosing to
dedicate our lives to the service of others will leave us with a
reward far greater than we can imagine. Our own trials will become
less important, and we will receive strength from God to overcome them
with joy. (You might say that all your wildest dreams will come true).

I thought it might be fun to explain the practical side of how I'm
trying to do this myself. If you've haven't read the 7 habits of
highly effective people, I would get a copy and read it. Besides the
scriptures, it's probably the only book that I genuinely think
everyone should read. I read it right after I got home from my
mission, and it gave me a deeper understanding of all the planning and
goal setting we did. Fun fact: weekly and daily planning wasn't
invented by Preach My Gospel (that blew my mind when I found it out).

Anyway, as per the advice of that book, I have a personal vision.
Every week I review my vision and I use it to articulate the things I
want to do in the upcoming week. A few weeks ago I made a major
revision to my personal vision. I thought about the main things I want
to accomplish with my career, and I thought about how those things
serve others. I came up with a list of five things:

- increase access to good music
- support our freely available software infrastructure
- help others to find a love of computers and programming
- advocate privacy and security
- support companies that have integrity

Those things might be revised as I go along, but right now they help
me to see how all the time I spend doing "non-spiritual" stuff is
really about helping others. More importantly, it will help me to make
life decisions. Although I do like the idea of having wealth, fame and
power, I don't want to sacrifice what really matters in their pursuit.
As the scripture in Jacob 2 goes,

> Before ye seek for riches, seek ye for the kingdom of God. And
> after ye have obtained a hope in Christ ye shall obtain riches, if
> ye seek them; and ye will seek them for the intent to do good—to
> clothe the naked, and to feed the hungry, and to liberate the
> captive, and administer relief to the sick and the afflicted.

I'd like to close with one experience that I have had. During my
senior year of high school, I was trying to learn the New Testament
scripture master verses. I wanted an app on my phone that would show
the verse and then incrementally blank out some of the words so you
could memorize it gradually. This was before the church made their
official scripture mastery app, and at the time, there weren't any
good ones available, at least not for Android. I am a computer science
major, and I have loved writing software for a long time. So, I
decided to make my own scripture mastery app. It was a lot of fun and
it helped me to learn the verses. I made it freely available on the
Android app store. It got over a thousand downloads, so that
was cool. It looks good on my resume.

Then one day, I got an email from someone named Tony. He was from
Austin, Texas and he was thanking me for making this app. He believed
it was doing an enormous amount of good in helping people to learn the
scriptures, and he said I would be amazed one day when I finally get
to see all the lives upon which I had had a positive influence. Since
then, I've had a lot of success related to my career and education,
but so far, none of it brings me as much joy as when I get those
opportunities to use my talents to do good for others.

As we make Christ the center of our lives, our lives can become
dedicated to service just as His was. We will be blessed with
opportunities to use our talents to help our brothers and sisters.
Opportunities for small acts of kindness along the way will come
naturally. And with these opportunities will come the joy and peace
that only true disciples of Christ enjoy. In the name of Jesus Christ,
amen.
