{:title "Education", :date "2017-04-10"}

A wise person once said, "Never let school get in the way of your
education." [1] I was home schooled up until I started
college, and now I've almost finished my Bachelor's degree. The
contrast between the two experiences has been enlightening. Although I
tend to be more favorable towards home schooling, both environments
have their advantages.

### Home school

**Freedom**. My dad introduced me to programming when I was 10 or 11,
and in 9th and 10th grade my learning accelerated a lot in that area.
It was easy for me to spend lots of time on computers and programming
because we chose the curriculum. Anything that was educational
could be a core subject. I got to pour lots of time into learning
about things I loved. I started to care a lot about my education, and
I became ambitious.

**Flexibility**. This goes hand-in-hand with freedom. I learned about
computers in spurts. When I thought of an idea for a program to write
or some other project to do, I would work on it many hours each day
for two or three weeks. During those times, I stopped working on other
subjects. After I completed the project, I then would catch up in
math, science, English, etc. My schedule adapted to fit my needs
instead of the other way around. [2]

There was also flexibility on a larger scale. I took geometry in 9th
grade. It came easily to me, so I finished it quickly and did algebra
2 in the same year. The next year I was able to go right into
pre-calculus. This was completely natural because I didn't have to be
in sync with a class; I could go at my own speed.

**Efficiency**. I learned programming from the internet (mainly
through Google). I learned math from watching short DVD lectures and
then working through problems on my own (eventually I started reading
the teacher's manual instead of watching the lectures because it was
faster). I watched video lectures from a man who loved history, and he
made it a great experience. There are many ways to disseminate
information, and home schooling made it easier to do it in the most
efficient way for each subject. In addition, learning alone is often
easier for me. I could stop and think about things that
don't make sense or speed through the parts I already got.

This experience was largely undiluted by homework assignments or exams
which often consist of busy work and aren't beneficial to learning.
Formal education tries to teach you stuff, but it also tries to verify
that you've learned that stuff. Or at the very least, it tries to make
sure you've expended a certain amount of time and effort in activities
that are related to the subject material. The effort to provide
verification often hurts the teaching process, but I was mostly free
from that in home school. I had to take a standardized test from
California every year, but it was easy.

### University

**Social interactions**. I never spent a ton of time interacting with
peers until I started my mission. I developed a lot of close
friendships, many of which are still active since many from
my mission came to BYU. I also had tons of fun. I never had that kind
of social experience while I was home schooled. Being at a university
with lots of friends has been great too.

To be fair, my lack of a social life before my mission was probably
due mostly to me being heavily introverted and living in a rural area. 
But being part of a formal education system does give you more
opportunities to be with friends.

Actually, I think meaningful social interactions are the main inherent
advantage of a formal education system. Books and the internet just
can't replicate conversations with other people.

**Exposure**. A structured system with required courses makes sure you
get a broad education instead of becoming too specialized. I learned a
lot of good things from my university courses that I probably wouldn't
have chosen to learn about otherwise.

**Accountability**. 
As much as I hate homework and exams for reasons stated above, they
can be helpful to make sure you actually do stuff. There was
accountability while I was home schooled; it was just less structured.
I liked the self-motivated, independent nature of home schooling, but
I think it's also valuable to be able to function in a system with
harder constraints. Deadlines can certainly be helpful when you're
lacking motivation.

### What to do

Here is my grand vision. It's still pretty general, so you'll have to
mentally fill in the blanks on your own for now. I've purposefully
left some details not figured out yet because I'm going for the big
picture.

Imagine a high school or university where only half of your time is
spent in classes. You would be expected to spend the rest of the time
on educational projects that were largely up to your own devising.
These projects could be all sorts of things, and they could be large
(like learning to make a website from scratch) or small (like reading
a book and writing an essay about it). They would allow you to branch
out and explore topics that might interest you. They would also let
you dig deeper into topics that you already like.

At a high level, the idea would be to take the euphoric home school
experience I've described and simply encapsulate it within a formal
education system. The school could somehow provide opportunities for
students to connect with other students that are interested in similar
topics. Teachers would act more as mentors and less as lecturers. They
would also provide accountability because the individual projects
would need to be approved and given a final grade by a faculty
mentor. [3]

This connecting with peers and mentors is worth emphasizing. I'm not
talking about simply doing group projects where you divide up the task
evenly and get it done as quickly as possible. I'm thinking of a less
formal type of interaction that stimulates and motivates/inspires
those involved. If you've read the 7 Habits of Highly Effective
People, the thing I'm describing is called synergy. It's hard to
define (it's been a while since I've read that book...), but I think
most people have experienced it at one point or another. It's the
feeling you might have when staying up late, talking to a room mate
about an exciting idea you just had.

This is the big thing home school lacks. University could also do a
lot better at it&mdash;being buried in course work all the time isn't very
conducive to those kinds of experiences. 

This hybrid system would have the advantages of both formal education
and home schooling in addition to extremely meaningful social
interactions that are currently lacking in both systems. It would give
students a more diverse experience: they would learn to function with
hard constraints, but they would also learn how to excel when it's all
up to you. They'd have flexibility because course work would take up
only part of their time instead of all of it.

But most importantly, this system would help students gain a deep
appreciation for learning. That would give them the drive to
accomplish great things no matter what system they find themselves in
down the road.

<br><br><br>
**Notes**

[1] This is the format I always use when quoting myself.

[2] In fact, I'm currently putting off school assignments so I
can finish this essay. This is only possible because I'm at the end of
the semester and I've already completed all my major projects. I
usually don't have this liberty.

[3] There is precedent for these kinds of projects, at least
in university. I've been able to get six credits for working on a
research project of my own devising, and it's mentored by one of the
computer science faculty. But that's only 5% of all the classes I have
to take. The new system would make these experiences a major part of
the core curriculum.
