+++
title = "A Brief History of Agile"
date = "2018-09-21"
+++

"Agile" development was a peculiar sport played by "software engineers," a type
of indentured servant who made their living by tapping buttons all day instead
of taking up a real career as a doctor, a lawyer or an actual engineer. Agile
was created as a form of entertainment for Scrum Masters, software engineers
who had been given special privileges in return for keeping the others in line.

Like other sports of the time, Agile was divided into various phases of game
play. Due to the indoor nature of button-tapping and the relatively low amount
of energy required to do so, Agile was played year round. A 12-month season was
separated into 4 quarters, each composed of 6 "sprints." Whoever scored the
most points won the sprint, so each engineer's goal was to maximize the points
they earned per day while minimizing the same ratio for their coworkers.

Engineers could score points by completing grueling tasks. These tasks were
called "stories" to make them sound more fun. Each story was assigned a certain
number of points at the beginning of each sprint through a ritual called
"estimation." Each engineer would vote on a number of points for the story, and
then based on the votes, the group would decide how many points each story
would ultimately be worth. Before deciding on a number of points, each engineer
would have to consider:

- How hard the story was (both for them and for their coworkers)
- Who the story would likely to be assigned to
- How many points they thought the other engineers would vote on

Each engineer hoped to receive stories that were easy for them but still worth
a lot of points.

This voting process was called "planning poker," so named because of the highly
psychological nature of estimation and the large amount of bluffing involved.
After the Scrum Master gave a countdown, each engineer would hold up a number
of fingers equal to the number of points they thought the story should be
worth. After removing outliers, the story was worth the average of the votes.

A basic strategy was:

1. Decide if you want the story to be worth many or few points.
2. Gauge how many points the other engineers will vote on.
3. Vote on a number of points that pulls the average in your desired direction
   without turning your vote into an outlier.

Being an outlier was very bad because it nullified your vote. In addition to
eliminating your influence on the final worth of the story, nulls were
considered unclean by many engineers. Nullified engineers were required to work
from home for three days.

In order to further humiliate outlying voters, they had to give an impromptu
explanation for why they voted so ridiculously. These reasons were expected to
be related only to the difficulty of the story, providing outsiders with the
illusion that estimation was simply part of getting the job done. But for
insiders, the humiliation damaged their ability to influence other engineers in
future estimations.

To heighten amusement for the Scrum Master, engineers were restricted to
choosing votes that fell in a certain set of numbers called the "Fibonacci
sequence," so called because the estimations were really just fibs.

There were many intricacies in planning poker strategy, most of which fall
outside the scope of this article. But there was at least one trick taken from
professional rock-paper-scissors tournaments: an engineer could pretend to vote
at the same time as the other engineers but really wait a split second longer;
thus they could see what the other votes were and respond accordingly. Only
those with more experience employed this tactic, as penalties for being caught
were severe.

After estimation was finished, it was a race (hence the term "sprint") to
finish as many stories as possible while subtly hindering coworkers. One common
tactic was to bring up "tests" right before a co-worker was about to finish a
story. If the other engineers agreed, the co-worker would be forced to spend a
day "testing" before marking the story as complete. During the test, engineers
were buffeted by a series of impossible-to-answer questions such as "When will
the current project be completed?"

Like the gladiatorial games, Agile was high stakes. Engineers who won the most
sprints would be promoted to "Senior Engineer," "Epic Engineer," and finally
"Manager." Promotions came with respectable pay increases but also tougher
competition. On the other end of the spectrum, a chart was used to keep track
of engineers who didn't finish all the stories they were assigned each sprint.
This was called a burndown chart because if the line on the chart reached the
upper-right corner, the engineer with the highest point deficit would be burned.

Eventually, engineers started to revolt and Agile fell out of practice. It was
replaced by a new movement, the name of which was chosen to represent the end
of the Agile burndowns: "Waterfall."
