+++
date = "2018-05-23"
title = "Structure vs. Flexibility"
+++
I've been thinking a lot about the yin-yang relationship between
structure and flexibility. In my [education
essay](/post/2017/education/), I talked about how one of
homeschooling's main strengths is flexibility while one of formal
education's main strengths is structure. The divide between structure
and flexibility is very deep. It can be seen in many places besides
just education.

"The ABCs of how we learn," a literature review of education research,
explains that there are two types of knowledge, which the authors call
efficient knowledge and innovative knowledge. Efficient knowledge
deals with how to refine existing tasks and solve recurring problems
more efficiently. Innovative knowledge deals with how to form new
processes and respond to novel problems.

"Primed to Perform," a book about high-performance cultures and their
underlying motivations, describes tactical performance and adaptive
performance. The authors define tactical performance as the ability to
follow a plan and adaptive performance as the ability to diverge from
a plan.

In "The Innovator's Dilemma," Clayton Christensen presents research
about two kinds of innovation: sustaining innovation and disruptive
innovation. As with the previous examples, these reflect structure and
flexibility. Sustaining innovation gives incremental improvements to
existing products while disruptive innovation creates new products
based on early-stage technology.

A fundamental problem in machine learning is the
balance between exploitation and exploration. The classic formulation
of this problem is called the N-armed bandit problem. If you have N
slot-machines (aka "bandits") with unknown payout distributions, what
strategy should you use to maximize your profit? You need to find a
balance between exploiting (playing on the slot machines that have
given the highest payouts in the past) and exploring (trying new slot
machines in the hope of finding some with higher payouts).

As a final example, there's a large debate in programming language
design between static typing and dynamic typing. Statically-typed
languages provide more structure while dynamically-typed languages
provide more flexibility.

In all cases, the best solution involves working in the existing,
known structure while retaining the flexibility to venture into new
areas. This needs to be done in a way that includes and improves upon
the strengths of both approaches. This is called a "win-win" solution
by Stephen Covey, and it's different from compromise. In compromise
you just find a half-way point that works well enough for both
parties, but in win-win, you come up with a creative idea that's
better than what either party had in mind to begin with.

So we should think about how to reconcile structure and flexibility in
our endeavors. This is hard. In most cultures that I'm familiar with
(and in my own life experiences), there seems to be a heavy bias
towards structure. In education, public school is much more dominant
that home school. "Primed to Perform" demonstrates quantitatively that
most organizations try to optimize for tactical performance at the
expense of adaptive performance. Statically-typed languages are more
popular in industry as far as I can tell.

Why the bias? Is it just cultural, or is there some inherent cause? My
hypothesis is that it's inherent. If you emphasize structure and not
flexibility, you'll have solutions that work decently well, even
though they aren't as good as they could be. If you emphasize flexibility
over structure, you might have some cool ideas but you won't be able
to turn them into concrete working solutions. Structure alone beats
flexibility alone, so the bias towards structure is just evolutionary.

(As an example, imagine incompetent parents trying to home school
their children vs. the standard practice of sending kids to public
school. This is where the home school horror stories come from.)

We have plenty of structured solutions today, but we shouldn't stop
here. The key to moving forward is learning how to introduce
flexibility while keeping the benefits of structure. As implied above,
the best route I think is to follow the progression from 1) nothing
(no structure and no flexibility), to 2) structure only, and finally
to 3) structure plus flexibility. 

As we follow this progression, we can't let structure stifle
flexibility. Structure brings much improvement when moving from
nothing, so we come to view this structure as "validated." But after
the structure is in place, flexible efforts to continue improvement
often don't fall within the structure. If the structure is followed
mindlessly, it will create a cage that restricts people from trying
out new ideas. Flexible ideas can be seen as frivolous, bad ideas
because they diverge from the already-validated structure. 

I felt this acutely as a missionary. We had very detailed methods for
goal-setting and planning. In our weekly planning sessions, we were
supposed to set a lot of quantitative goals and talk about prescribed
topics for how to plan around those numbers. The idea was to create an
effective system that brings predictable results. But for the majority
of my mission, it felt like the system was broken. In hindsight, I
wish I had tried to be much more creative and flexible during weekly
planning. I think we could have come up with great ideas for how to do
missionary work in a way that met the needs of the locals.

So how do we avoid this pitfall? I think a few things are helpful.
First is to remember win-win. When you find two opposing ideas, the
truth usually lies in a combination of the two&mdash;not one or the other.
With static vs. dynamic typing, I believe the answer is in some
combination of the two ideas. (Clojure.spec is a good step in that
direction, though it's not all the way there yet). Remembering win-win
will make sure you seek for the real truth instead of getting stuck on
one side of a useless debate.

Second is a healthy disrespect for conventional thinking. This will
help you cultivate potentially good ideas which otherwise would be
dismissed. One of Einstein's greatest strengths was that he was
perfectly comfortable challenging the accepted wisdom of the
scientific community. This allowed him to develop his theories of
relativity which broke science free from the model of Newtonian
mechanics that had governed physics for hundreds of years. Although it
would be impractical to never rely on society's accrued knowledge, we
should look for ideas that are ready to be challenged. No idea should
be considered free from the need of further validation.

Third is a habit of experimentation. Any idea should be allowed as a
hypothesis, but then it needs to be tested. Existing structure
shouldn't prevent you from experimenting on new ideas, but you also
shouldn't accept new ideas before they've been validated. My personal
goal-setting and planning system has undergone much experimentation
over the past three years. This is the process by which a lot of
potentially good ideas become a few actually good ideas.

This is the key to combining structure and flexibility, and it's
basically just the scientific method. It's an effective pattern for
discovering truth in all areas, not just what we call science. There's
more work to be done incorporating it into other parts of our lives.
